Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we will learn about archives, so, for example, if someone wanted to view only blog
posts from a certain category or by a certain author or from a certain date, let me show you what I'm
referring to.
So if I go up in the address bar and visit slash blog, this screen has multiple blog posts.
But you'll notice that this first post is categorized in the awards category.
And if I click on that category, link up in the address bar, we can see that that takes me to slash
category slash awards.
So this is an archive screen, meaning it will only show posts from that one category.
We would call this a category archive or for another example, if I click on this author link.
Now up in the address bar that takes us to slash author Slash Brad, so this URL and this screen is
an example of an author archive.
Now, at the moment, these author and category archive screens are being powered by index, part of
our theme folder.
But really, at the end of the day, that's not the job of the index file index is really just supposed
to be a generic fallback.
Last line of defense insurance policy index is never WordPress is first choice.
WordPress would rather use an appropriate theme file depending on the you are really you're visiting
in this case, the file would be archived.
So right now, let's go ahead and create an archive file and use it to set up relevant archive title
headlines here like authored by Brad or Category Awards instead of this generic.
Welcome to our blog text.
So in your text editor within our theme folder, let's create a brand new file.
And let's name this new file archive, dot HP, OK, so we have an empty archived file, and if we refresh
an archive screen, I'm on the author archive for the Brad user.
You can see that the screen is completely blank.
And if I say hello world in my template, that's all we see for that screen.
So in order to get this template up and running, why don't we just copy and paste the entire contents
of index dot?
So I'm going to jump in index, highlight everything on the page and copy it into my clipboard and then
back in archive, paste that in.
And then if I scroll up to the very top, let's begin by focusing on this heading level one that reads
welcome to our blog.
So on this archive template, we don't want this text here to be hard coded.
So let's delete that message and instead let's use it output a dynamic title.
Now we're going to want different titles depending on whether we're on a category archive or an author
archive or a date archive.
So one way we can handle this would be to drop into PHP and we could say if and then our condition goes
within the parentheses, we could say if and then we can call a function named is category and this
function will return.
True, if you are on a category archive screen, otherwise it will return false.
So then after the if condition, we could open up curly brackets dropdown.
So if this evaluates to true, we could just echo out a message that says category name will go here
and we can fill that in in just a moment for now.
But this will be a nice placeholder.
And then right after this closing curly bracket for the IF statement, let's just write another if statement
so you could type here or you could drop down to a new line.
And let's say if.
Parentheses, we can say if this is an author archive, so you just say is author and this function
will return true if you're on an author archive scream.
So if that's the case, curly brackets, let's just echo out a message that says author name will go
here and we can fill that in with real data.
And just a moment.
But if we save this and refresh.
Cool, I'm on to author archive you, Earl.
So we see author name will go here, but if I click on this awards category link.
I'm on a category archive and now I see category name will go here, cool.
So now we just need to hollow out these placeholders with the actual category name and the actual author
name.
So within this first if statement, within the curly brackets, let's delete this echo line and to get
the dynamic name of the category that you're currently viewing, we can call a function named Single
Cat as in category title and we do not need to it.
WordPress will handle outputting it for us.
So if we save that and refresh perfect.
So we are on the awards category archive.
So this title makes sense.
And if I click on the author name to go to the author archive, let's work on that one next.
So instead of echoing out, the author will go here.
Let's delete that line and we can just call a WordPress function named the author.
Cool, but maybe you don't just want the nickname, maybe you want to preface it by saying posts by
Brad, well, back in our code we could do just that.
So right before we call that the author function, we could echo out our own text that reads posts by
and then space.
Then we could include a semicolon and then call this author function.
So if I save that now we see posts by Brad.
Cool.
So you can use that strategy to phrase the archive titles however you see fit.
So that takes care of category in author archives.
But what about based archives?
Let me show you an example of a date archive.
So if I click on one of the individual blog posts to go to the single view up in the address bar, you
can see it begins with the year and then the month and then the day.
And then finally the slug name for that particular post.
However, you can delete the slug from the end of the URL.
And this is a day based archive, right?
This screen will show you all of the blog posts from the 8th of June.
Or you could even delete the 08 and then this would be a month based archive.
This would show you all posts from June.
And obviously, if you get rid of the month, this would be a year based archive that only shows posts
for twenty seventeen.
Now, as you can imagine, setting up different if statements for every one of those situations could
be exhausting.
Right.
Setting up an if statement for the year check and then another one for the month check and another if
statement for the day check that could get really old really quickly and it would result in a ton of
work.
Well, luckily for us, towards the very end of 2014, WordPress introduced a new function that can
save us a ton of work when it comes to archive titles.
So check this out.
I know this is sort of undoing everything we've been working on for the last three to four minutes,
but let's actually hollow out this heading level one.
So let's delete all of this that we just wrote.
So now I'm back to just an empty heading level one.
And in between the H1 tags, let's drop into P and let's call a WordPress function that is only a few
years old.
It's named the archive title, and that's it.
There's one function will take care of everything for us.
So if I save that, I'm on a year based archive and it has the appropriate title.
If I go back to the month archive, we're in business.
Go back to the day archive.
Perfect.
If I click on awards to go to a category archive makes sense.
And if I click on Brad to go to an author archive, looking good.
So it's up to you.
If you want to have fine grained control over the exact phrasing of your titles, you can set up your
own if statements like we were doing a few minutes ago or if good is good enough, I encourage you to
just use this the archive title function and call it a day.
OK, now let's change gears and let's focus on this subtitle.
Right.
We probably don't want to output keep up with our latest news on every single archive screen.
So let's delete that.
And within that paragraph tag, let's drop in to P and let's call the brother or sister to this function,
which is named the archive description.
Now, if I say this at first glance, you might think that it does nothing right, because we don't
see any text here.
But what's really going on is because we are on an author archive screen.
That new description function is trying to pull in the biography text for this current author.
So try this out with me.
If you jump into your WordPress admin and hover over users in the sidebar, go ahead and click your
profile.
And if you scroll down to the bottom of this page, you'll notice a field here named Biographical Info.
Now, whatever you type here will be considered the description for your author archive screen.
So if I just say testing hello world one, two, three as my biography and then click update.
Well, that will show up as the description.
Cool.
Now let's work on the description text for category archives.
So if I click on awards to go to the awards category archive, we notice that there's no description
text and that's because I never assigned a description for the category.
Let me show you what I mean.
Back in the WordPress admin, if you hover over posts towards the top of your sidebar, then you can
click on categories.
Now, you might have all sorts of categories, but in my case, I'm going to click on the awards category
here and here we see a field named.
Description, so I can say we love to blog about our awards and save that or update it, and there we
see it.
Now, that's going to bring this lesson on archives to a close.
But bigger picture, we are now more or less done with our blog section.
Now we just need to integrate our blog with our custom home page.
So, for example, if I click this logo in the top left header to go back to the home page in this beige
column here, you'll notice that we need to dynamically pull in the two most recent blog posts.
Now, these examples that we see here, we were voted best school and professors in the national spotlight.
Those are not real blog posts.
That's just hard coded fake HTML.
In order to actually pull in the real dynamic two most recent blog posts, we are going to need to learn
about something called custom queries.
And that's exactly what we're going to cover in our next lesson.
I know that personally for me, when I first learned about custom queries, it was an aha moment for
me in terms of learning WordPress.
Once you understand custom queries, you'll go from.
Hmm, I kind of understand how WordPress works, too.
I can make WordPress do whatever I need it to do.
It's a really fun leap to make.
And your understanding and I'm going to do everything I can to get you there.
Let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.